📖 add ipam integration proposal (#6000)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20220125-ipam-integration.md

An IPAddress is a custom resource that gets created by an IPAM provider to fulfil an IPAddressClaim, which then gets consumed by the infrastructure provider that created the claim.

### IP Pool

An IP Pool is a custom resource that is provided by a IPAM provider, which holds configuration for a single pool of IP addresses that can be allocated from using an IPAddressClaim.

## Summary

This proposal adds an API contract for pluggable IP Address Management to CAPI that any infrastructure provider can choose to implement. It allows them to dynamically allocate and release IP Addresses from IP Address Pools following a similar concept as Kubernetes' PersistentVolumes. Pools are managed by IPAM Providers, which allow to integrate with external systems like Netbox or Infoblox.

## Motivation

IP address management for machines is currently left to the infrastructure providers for CAPI. Most on-premise providers (e.g. CAPV) allow the use of either DHCP or statically configured IPs. Since Machines are created from templates, static allocation would require a single template for each machine, which prevents dynamic scaling of nodes without custom controllers that create new templates.

> While DHCP is a viable solution for dynamic IP assignment which also enables scaling, it can cause problems in conjunction with CAPI. Especially in smaller networks rolling cluster upgrades can exhaust the network in use. When multiple machines are replaced in quick succession, each of them will get a new DHCP lease. Unless the lease time is very short, at least twice as many IPs as the maximum number of nodes has to be allocated to a cluster.

Reviewer: can we elaborate a bit how this proposal alleviate this problem?

Author: I've added a short paragraph in the Proposal section.

           name: testpool
```

A Machine generated from that template could then look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: VSphereMachine
metadata:
name: example-1
namespace: vsphere-site1
spec:
 cloneMode: FullClone
 numCPUs: 8
 memoryMiB: 8192
 diskGiB: 45
 network:
   devices:
   - dhcp4: false
     fromPool: # reference to the pool
       group: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
       kind: IPPool
       name: testpool
status:
 network:
   devices:
     - claim:
         name: example-1-1
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster operator I want to use static IP addresses with my Machines to avoid problems with DHCP lease duration during rolling cluster upgrades.

#### Story 2

As a cluster operator I want to integrate machines provisioned by CAPI with an external IPAM system and allocate IP addresses from it.

#### Story 3

As an infrastructure provider I want a single interface to integrate with multiple different IPAM providers.

#### Story 4

As an IPAM provider I want a single interface to integrate with all infrastructure providers that can benefit from IPAM integration.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> 

Reviewer: can we talk a bit here about contract/good practices on how consumers i.e infraProviders are expected to interact with this API?
e.g:
- An infraProvider which Machine has an IPPool reference must create a IPClaim for it (and add an ownerRef?).
- An infraProvider owning and IPClaim must wait for the resulting IP until it keeps making progress.
- An infraProvider waiting for an IP must signal that in its conditions and this condition must be required to compute for the "ready" condition with reason="waitingForIP".
- An infraProvider which is given an IP must signal that in its conditions and this condition must be required to compute for the "ready".
- An infraProvider referencing a IPPool must set the given IP in its .status.Addresses.

Author: I've added two sections for ipam and infra providers with more details.

   Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`
}

// IPAddressClaimStatus contains the status of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimStatus struct {
   // Address is a reference to the address that was allocated for this claim.
   Address LocalObjectReference `json:"address,omitempty"`

  // Conditions provide details about the status of the claim.
	// +optional
	Conditions clusterv1.Conditions `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddressClaim can be used to allocate IPAddresses from an IP Pool.
type IPAddressClaim struct {
   metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
   metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
   Spec   IPAddressClaimSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
   Status IPAddressClaimStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}
```

##### IPAddress

IPAddress resources are created to fulfil an IPAddressClaim. They are created by the IPAM provider that reconciles the claim.

IPAddresses are immutable.

```go
// IPAddressSpec describes an IPAddress
type IPAddressSpec struct {
   // Claim is a reference to the claim this IPAddress was created for.
   Claim LocalObjectReference `json:"claim,omitempty"`
 
   // Pool is a reference to the pool that this IPAddress was created from.

>    Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`

Reviewer: do we envision use cases where a pool does not necessarily need to be presented as a CRD but something that's in handled but the provider transparently?

Author: For eventual consistency reasons I wouldn't validate the reference is valid. So in theory it could also point to nothing if that is actually a use case. But as some configuration is probably always required, a single pool shared between all clusters is probably the better option.

```go
type LocalObjectReference struct {
  Group string
  Kind string
  Name string
}
```

#### Additional Notes

- An example provider that provides in-cluster IP Address management (also useful for testing, or when no other IPAM solution is available) should be implemented as a separate project in a separate repository.
- A shared library for providers and consumers should be implemented as part of that in-cluster IP Address provider.
  - helpers to create IPAddresses
  - a predicate to filter IPAddressClaims
  - ... anything else that can be shared between providers and consumers

### Security Model

- IPAddressClaim, IPAddress and Pools are required to be in the same namespace, and also in the same namespace as the Cluster.
  - For IPAddressClaim and IPAddress this is enforced by the lack of a namespace field on the reference
  - Infrastructure Providers need to ensure that only Pools in the same namespace can be referenced, ideally by excluding namespace from the reference.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Unresponsive IPAM providers can prevent successful creation of a cluster
- Wrong IP address allocations (e.g. duplicates) can brick a cluster’s network

## Alternatives

> 

Reviewer: I'm curious how does this proposal aligns with metal3-io/ip-address-manager cc @furkatgofurov7?

Author: If metal3 adds support for this proposal it could be discontinued in my opinion. It currently only provides in-cluster IP address management. But it was built in a way that would allow adding different providers as well. I've started working on an in-cluster provider for this proposal which is much simpler as there is no generic layer in between.

As per this proposal, integration with different IPAM solutions would be implemented as separate IPAM providers. We will start working on a provider for Infoblox as soon as this proposal is merged.

Since we're using metal3, we'd also be happy to contribute integration for this proposal there.

Reviewer 2: > I'm curious how does this proposal aligns with metal3-io/ip-address-manager plans cc @furkatgofurov7?

Hey,
Great discussion has been going on here lately! We are considering the possibility of switching to the IPAM solution outlined in this proposal.

> If metal3 adds support for this proposal it could be discontinued in my opinion. It currently only provides in-cluster IP address management. But it was built in a way that would allow adding different providers as well. I've started working on an in-cluster provider for this proposal which is much simpler as there is no abstraction layer in between.
> 

@schrej Thanks, we are planning on discontinuing the use of our IPAM solution and going with this one but we would like to make sure it is fully compatible. 

> Since we're using metal3, we'd also be happy to contribute integration for this proposal there.

:+1:

All on-premise providers have a need for IP Address Management, since they can't leverage SDN features that are available in clouds such as AWS, Azure or GCP. We therefore propose to add an API contract to CAPI, which allows infrastructure providers to integrate with different IPAM systems. A similar approach to Kubernetes' PersistentVolumes should be used where infrastructure providers create Claims that reference a specific IP Pool, and IPAM providers fulfill claims to Pools managed by them.

### Goals

- Define an API contract that
    - allows infrastructure providers to dynamically allocate and release addresses
    - allows to write IPAM providers to integrate with any IPAM solution
    - supports both IPv4 and IPv6

### Non-Goals/Future Work

> - IPAM providers should not be added to CAPI directly, but live as individual projects instead.

Reviewer 3: More precisely. Would we include the CRDs in our core CAPI manifest?

> - IPAM providers should not be added to CAPI directly, but live as individual projects instead.

Author: I think it wouldn't hurt to include IPAddressClaim and IPAddress in the core manifests, even if they are unused. The Pools have to be deployed together with their respective provider.

> - IPAddress and IPAddressPool will only have limited validation (e.g. that the referenced Pool exists and that IP address strings are valid addresses). Advanced validation (whether an IP is actually part of the correct subnet for example) needs to be handled by IPAM providers.

Reviewer 3: Based on below (immutability), I assume we'll add a webhook for validation to core CAPI?

> - IPAddress and IPAddressPool will only have limited validation (e.g. that the referenced Pool exists and that IP address strings are valid addresses). Advanced validation (whether an IP is actually part of the correct subnet for example) needs to be handled by IPAM providers.

Author: We'll need webhooks for IPAddress and IPAddressPool, yes.

> - IPAddress and IPAddressPool will only have limited validation (e.g. that the referenced Pool exists and that IP address strings are valid addresses). Advanced validation (whether an IP is actually part of the correct subnet for example) needs to be handled by IPAM providers.

Reviewer 3: Feel free to just resolve. Was mostly for my understanding.

### Pools & IPAM Providers

In order for IPAM providers to fulfil IPAddressClaims, they likely require a few parameters, e.g. the network from which to allocate an IP address. If there are multiple different IPAM providers, they also need to know which claims they are supposed to fulfil, and which to ignore.

Therefore, IPAM providers are required to bring a custom IP Pool resource. The resource can have an arbitrary structure with the specific parameters for the IPAM system in use, and by inspecting the API group and kind of the pool reference held by IPAddressClaims, the provider can determine whether it is supposed to handle the claim or not.

When an IPAM provider finds a IPAddressClaim that references one of its Pools, it allocates an IP address, creates an IPAddress resource and updates the status of the IPAddressClaim with a reference to this IPAddress.

#### Examples

A simple example for an IP Pool could look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1

> kind: InClusterIPPool

Reviewer 3: Saw the corresponding comments in Additional Notes. Might absolutely make sense to implement it in a separate repo, but if we end up implementing significant code in the core repo, I think it would be good to have a reference implementation in the core repo at some point to make testing easier. (like with CAPD)

> kind: InClusterIPPool

Author: I have a reference implementation already, just waiting on a repo to share it. The proposal also mentions this in the implementation section. That reference implementation should also contain shared libraries that can be used by providers (both infra and ipam).

> kind: InClusterIPPool

Reviewer 3: Got it.

Depending on with which solution we end up, it sounds like we might end up with dependencies between:
* Core <= reference impl / lib
* Core <= infra providers
* reference impl / lib <= infra providers

Which is fine as it's not a circular dependency, but it means that the libraries have to upgrade to the latest Core CAPI version before infra provider can pick that up.

I guess that probably means if the reference impl is in a separate repo and the types are in core CAPI we should maybe add the library to core CAPI instead.

> kind: InClusterIPPool

Author: I'd prefer to add the library to core. It was just my impression that the preference would be to keep this separate, as it doesn't concern all providers. On the other hand that shared library probably isn't going to be that big. Just some helpers to create addresses, and query claims and addresses I'd imagine.

> kind: InClusterIPPool

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can just infer from whatever we decide to do regarding maybe adding a field for ipPool to a core type

More implementation details can be found [here](#consuming-as-an-infrastructure-provider).

#### Example

Using CAPV as an example, a template *could* look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: VSphereMachineTemplate
metadata:
 name: example
 namespace: vsphere-site1
spec:
 template:
   spec:
     cloneMode: FullClone
     numCPUs: 8
     memoryMiB: 8192
     diskGiB: 45
     network:
       devices:
       - dhcp4: false
         fromPool: # reference to the pool
           group: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
           kind: IPPool
           name: testpool
```

A Machine generated from that template could then look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: VSphereMachine
metadata:
name: example-1
namespace: vsphere-site1
spec:
 cloneMode: FullClone
 numCPUs: 8
 memoryMiB: 8192
 diskGiB: 45
 network:
   devices:
   - dhcp4: false
     fromPool: # reference to the pool
       group: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
       kind: IPPool
       name: testpool
status:
 network:
   devices:
     - claim:
         name: example-1-1
```

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 3: Should we move this section to the beginning of the Proposal section?

Author: I've moved it up for now.

#### Story 4

As an IPAM provider I want a single interface to integrate with all infrastructure providers that can benefit from IPAM integration.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### New API Types

The following API Types should be added to cluster-api. In the first iteration they will be added to the experimental API and will therefore live in the `cluster.x-k8s.io` group.

##### IPAddressClaim

The IPAddressClaim is used to request ip addresses from a pool. It gets reconciled by IPAM providers, which can filter based on the `Spec.Pool` reference.

After an IPAddressClaim is created, the `Spec.Pool` reference, and therefore essentially the entire `Spec` is immutable to simplify reconciliation of the resource.

```go
// IPAddressClaimSpec describes the desired state of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimSpec struct {
  // Pool is a reference to the pool from which an IP address should be allocated.
  Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`
}

// IPAddressClaimStatus contains the status of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimStatus struct {
  // Address is a reference to the address that was allocated for this claim.

>   Address LocalObjectReference `json:"address,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Is it a problem if we lose this information through a clusterctl move?

Author: If ipam providers adhere to the principle of always being able to recompute status - no.

Reviewer 3: Ah I missed that the IPAddress has a reference to the Claim, so it's relatively easy to just set it again.

Author: Also the name of the claim and the address is probably going to be identical (or the providers have to figure out another way of how to correlate them).

Reviewer 3: We just have to be clear if we want to depend on the name being the same (there was some fun regarding Machine and InfraMachine names in the past)

Author: I'd say we won't, that's up to the provider.

  // Conditions provide details about the status of the claim.
	// +optional
	Conditions clusterv1.Conditions `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddressClaim can be used to allocate IPAddresses from an IP Pool.
type IPAddressClaim struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
  
  Spec   IPAddressClaimSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
  Status IPAddressClaimStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}
```

##### IPAddress

IPAddress resources are created to fulfil an IPAddressClaim. They are created by the IPAM provider that reconciles the claim.

IPAddresses are immutable.

```go
// IPAddressSpec describes an IPAddress
type IPAddressSpec struct {
  // Claim is a reference to the claim this IPAddress was created for.
  Claim LocalObjectReference `json:"claim,omitempty"`
 
  // Pool is a reference to the pool that this IPAddress was created from.
  Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`
 
  // Address is the IP address.
  Address string `json:"address"`
 

>   // Prefix is the prefix of the address.

Reviewer 3: Sorry probably stupid question, what is the prefix of an address?

Author: Meant to be the Subnet Mask, maybe it's a bad name.

Reviewer 3: Ah got it. Not an expert in networking but maybe SubnetMask or something similar would be better

Author: Me neither. Apparently with IPv6 the term `routing prefix` is more appropriate, and for IPv4 the subnet mask is technically just a different representation of that prefix. I'll stick with `prefix`.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subnetwork

  Prefix int `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
 
  // Gateway is the network gateway of network the address is from.
  Gateway string `json:"gateway,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddress is a representation of an IP Address that was allocated from an IP Pool.
type IPAddress struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

  Spec IPAddressSpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`
}
```

##### New Reference Type

```go
type LocalObjectReference struct {
  Group string
  Kind string
  Name string
}
```

> #### Implementing an IPAM Provider

Reviewer 3: I think a sequence diagram how different components work together to create an IPAddress could be helpful

Author: Too much freestyle or is this sufficient?
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1710904/157898609-dbb556a4-c89b-48ca-96aa-c210be013ca5.png)

The primary task of the IPAM provider is fulfilling IPAddressClaims, usally issued by infrastructure providers. The provider therefore has to reconcile IPAddressClaims that are referencing one of its pools. It has to allocate IPs and create IPAddress objects for each claim.

A claim is fulfilled once an IPAddress object is created, and the status of the claim is updated with a reference to that IPAddress object. During the allocation process, the `.Status.Conditions` array of the IPAddressClaim should be used to reflect the status of the allocation process. Especially errors have to be visible.

When an IPAddressClaim that is reconciled by a provider is deleted, the provider needs to release the IP address belonging to the claim and delete the related IPAddress object. To do so a Finalzier should be added to the claim to prevent its deletion until the address is released.

> IPAddress objects (as well as claims) are immutable. For each IPAddressClaim, one corresponding IPAddress object gets created. As long as the claim exists that IPAddress object must not change. When an IPAddress object is deleted while its claim still exists there are two options:

Reviewer 3: Probably already clear but I assume only the spec's are immutable.

Author: Yes.

After an IPAddressClaim is created, the `Spec.Pool` reference, and therefore essentially the entire `Spec` is immutable to simplify reconciliation of the resource.

```go
// IPAddressClaimSpec describes the desired state of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimSpec struct {
  // Pool is a reference to the pool from which an IP address should be allocated.
  Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`
}

// IPAddressClaimStatus contains the status of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimStatus struct {
  // Address is a reference to the address that was allocated for this claim.
  Address LocalObjectReference `json:"address,omitempty"`

  // Conditions provide details about the status of the claim.
	// +optional
	Conditions clusterv1.Conditions `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddressClaim can be used to allocate IPAddresses from an IP Pool.
type IPAddressClaim struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
  
  Spec   IPAddressClaimSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
  Status IPAddressClaimStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`

> }

Author: I'll include that in the implementation, just omitted it from the proposal for brevity.

```

##### IPAddress

IPAddress resources are created to fulfil an IPAddressClaim. They are created by the IPAM provider that reconciles the claim.

IPAddresses are immutable.

```go
// IPAddressSpec describes an IPAddress
type IPAddressSpec struct {
  // Claim is a reference to the claim this IPAddress was created for.
  Claim LocalObjectReference `json:"claim,omitempty"`
 
  // Pool is a reference to the pool that this IPAddress was created from.
  Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`
 
  // Address is the IP address.
  Address string `json:"address"`
 
  // Prefix is the prefix of the address.
  Prefix int `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
 
  // Gateway is the network gateway of network the address is from.
  Gateway string `json:"gateway,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddress is a representation of an IP Address that was allocated from an IP Pool.
type IPAddress struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

  Spec IPAddressSpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`

> }

Author: Same as above.

   * [Proposal](#proposal)
      * [IPAM API Contract](#ipam-api-contract)
      * [Pools &amp; IPAM Providers](#pools--ipam-providers)
      * [Consumption](#consumption)
         * [Examples](#examples)
      * [User Stories](#user-stories)
         * [Story 1](#story-1)
         * [Story 2](#story-2)
         * [Story 3](#story-3)
         * [Story 4](#story-4)
      * [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
         * [New API Types](#new-api-types)
            * [IPAddressClaim](#ipaddressclaim-1)
            * [IPAddress](#ipaddress-1)
            * [New Reference Type](#new-reference-type)
         * [Implementing an IPAM Provider](#implementing-an-ipam-provider)
         * [Consuming as an Infrastructure Provider](#consuming-as-an-infrastructure-provider)
         * [Additional Notes](#additional-notes)
      * [Security Model](#security-model)
      * [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
   * [Alternatives](#alternatives)
   * [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

### IPAM Provider

> A controller that watches IPAddressClaims and fulfils them with IPAddresses that it allocates from an IP Pool. It comes with it's own IP Pool custom resource definition to provide parameters for allocating addresses. Providers can work in-cluster relying only on custom resources, or integrate with external systems like Netbox or Infoblox.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A controller that watches `IPAddressClaims` and fulfils them with `IPAddresses` that it allocates from an `IPPool`. It comes with its own `IPPool` custom resource definition to provide parameters for allocating addresses. Providers can work in-cluster relying only on custom resources, or integrate with external systems like Netbox or Infoblox.
```

All on-premise providers have a need for IP Address Management, since they can't leverage SDN features that are available in clouds such as AWS, Azure or GCP. We therefore propose to add an API contract to CAPI, which allows infrastructure providers to integrate with different IPAM systems. A similar approach to Kubernetes' PersistentVolumes should be used where infrastructure providers create Claims that reference a specific IP Pool, and IPAM providers fulfill claims to Pools managed by them.

### Goals

- Define an API contract that
    - allows infrastructure providers to dynamically allocate and release addresses
    - allows to write IPAM providers to integrate with any IPAM solution
    - supports both IPv4 and IPv6
    - allows to run multiple IPAM providers in parallel

### Non-Goals/Future Work

> - IPAM providers should not be added to CAPI directly, but live as individual projects instead.

Reviewer 4: Are we expecting Cluster API to own these resources? If so, the management cluster should also make sure that creation of new pools and claims are non-overlapping and so on?

Author: No, the providers own their pools, and they have to decide whether a pool is valid. The same applies to `IPAddressClaims` referencing their pools.

It is the responsibility of the Infrastructure Provider to ensure the IPAddressClaim is not deleted as long as the IP address is in use. It should block the deletion of the IPAddressClaim using a Finalizer until the Infrastructure Machine is destroyed. It has to make sure the Finalizer is removed before the Machine is deleted.

The IPAddressClaim must contain a owner reference to the Infrastructure Machine it was created for.

The Infrastructure Machine has to reflect IP Address allocation status in it's conditions, and this has to be incorporated into it's `Ready` condition. This is likely to be the case anyway, as the IP address will probably be required to provision the machine.

The used IP addresses must be reflected in `.Status.Addresses` of a Machine.

See the following picture for a sequence diagram of the allocation process.

![sequence diagram of the consumption process](./images/ipam-integration/sequence.png)

#### Additional Notes

> - An example provider that provides in-cluster IP Address management (also useful for testing, or when no other IPAM solution is available) should be implemented as a separate project in a separate repository.

Author: So you want to add the in-cluster provider to CAPI directly? When I started with this proposal I got the impression that you wouldn't want to have something like that as part of core CAPI.

We can definitely include a standard `IPPool` or `InClusterIPPool` as part of CAPI. It's not that much anyway, see [telekom/cluster-api-ipam-provider-in-cluster](https://github.com/telekom/cluster-api-ipam-provider-in-cluster).

Be aware that the proposal currently doesn't include separating large Pools into smaller subnets. It's only about allowing to integrate with the machine creation process, as there is currently no way to automate that. Allocating Subnets from a larger pool could be interesting in conjunction with ClusterClass, but is currently not part of this proposal at all, and could also be another iteration later on.

All on-premise providers have a need for IP Address Management, since they can't leverage SDN features that are available in clouds such as AWS, Azure or GCP. We therefore propose to add an API contract to CAPI, which allows infrastructure providers to integrate with different IPAM systems. A similar approach to Kubernetes' PersistentVolumes should be used where infrastructure providers create Claims that reference a specific IP Pool, and IPAM providers fulfill claims to Pools managed by them.

### Goals

- Define an API contract that
    - allows infrastructure providers to dynamically allocate and release addresses
    - allows to write IPAM providers to integrate with any IPAM solution
    - supports both IPv4 and IPv6

> ### Non-Goals/Future Work

Reviewer 5: Adding ClusterClass support for IPClaims could be characterized as a potential future goal, though this is hostage to the proposed change (talked about below) of Machine objects creating IPClaims.

Author: What do you mean exactly? If you create the pool alongside the machine and pass in the name using a variable, it can be used with ClusterClass without any changes.
Or are you referring to using it to fetch IPs for the api etc.?

Reviewer 3: I think this goes into the direction of e.g. having a ipPoolRef in ClusterClass + a <X>IPPoolTemplate. When a specific cluster is then created we can use variables to customize the IPPool (e.g. the IP range) for that specific cluster.

This way it would be seamlessly integrated vs. creating IPPools independent of ClusterClass and then just referencing them.

While DHCP is a viable solution for dynamic IP assignment which also enables scaling, it can cause problems in conjunction with CAPI. Especially in smaller networks rolling cluster upgrades can exhaust the network in use. When multiple machines are replaced in quick succession, each of them will get a new DHCP lease. Unless the lease time is very short, at least twice as many IPs as the maximum number of nodes has to be allocated to a cluster.

Metal3 has an ip-address-manager component that allows for in-cluster management of IP addresses through custom resources, allowing to avoid DHCP. CAPV allows to ommit the address from the template while having DHCP disabled, and will wait until it is set manually, allowing to implement custom controllers to take care of IP assignments. At DTAG we've extended metal3's ip-address-manager and wrote a custom controller for CAPV to integrate both with Infoblox, our IPAM solution of choice. The CAPV project has shown interest, and there has been a proposal to allow integrating metal3's ip-address-manager with external systems.

> All on-premise providers have a need for IP Address Management, since they can't leverage SDN features that are available in clouds such as AWS, Azure or GCP. We therefore propose to add an API contract to CAPI, which allows infrastructure providers to integrate with different IPAM systems. A similar approach to Kubernetes' PersistentVolumes should be used where infrastructure providers create Claims that reference a specific IP Pool, and IPAM providers fulfill claims to Pools managed by them.

Reviewer 6: AWS also has infoblox extension, and announced their own VPC IPAM. If CAPA integrate with those in the future this contract could also be taken advantage
https://aws.amazon.com/marketplace/pp/prodview-opxe3p2cgudwe

Author: Wouldn't that be an integration with VPCs directly without the need to manually interact with Infoblox when creating a ec2 machine? Because in that case it wouldn't require this contract.

Reviewer 6: Hm yeah you are right. That would be a detour. You can close this one.

### Goals

- Define an API contract that
    - allows infrastructure providers to dynamically allocate and release addresses
    - allows to write IPAM providers to integrate with any IPAM solution
    - supports both IPv4 and IPv6

### Non-Goals/Future Work

> <!-- none so far -->

Reviewer 7: might be a good idea to include who's responsibility would it be to validate / do a sanity check on large IPv6 subnetworks. i can imagine that some infrastructure IPAMs would only support a subset of the full IPv6 address space. if the implementation on the CAPI side would not implement any validation, and just pass transparently the claims, it might be the responsibility of implementors to do the validation. the document should perhaps clarify that or include something under goals/non-goals.

Author: The `InClusterIPPool` just serves as an example in this proposal. It would be handled by the corresponding in-cluster IPAM provider. I'm currently working on a prototype for that one.

      * [Consumption](#consumption)
      * [User Stories](#user-stories)
         * [Story 1](#story-1)
         * [Story 2](#story-2)
         * [Story 3](#story-3)
         * [Story 4](#story-4)
      * [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
      * [Security Model](#security-model)
      * [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
   * [Alternatives](#alternatives)
   * [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

### IPAM Provider

A component that provides IP Address Management to Cluster API resources. Examples include in-cluster management of IPs through custom resources, or integration with external systems like Netbox or Infoblox.

### IPAddressClaim

An IPAddressClaim is a custom resource that can be used by infrastructure providers to allocate IP addresses from IP Pools that are managed by IPAM providers.

### IPAddress

An IPAddress is a custom resource that gets created by an IPAM provider to fulfil an IPAddressClaim, which then gets consumed by the infrastructure provider that created the claim.

> ### IP Pool

Reviewer: IPPool?

Reviewer 4: +1

Author: Intentional, see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/6000#discussion_r794425270). There won't be an `IPPool` resource that's part of CAPI, so I wanted it to be clear that it isn't a resource but a category of resources.

### Goals

- Define an API contract that
    - allows infrastructure providers to dynamically allocate and release addresses
    - allows to write IPAM providers to integrate with any IPAM solution
    - supports both IPv4 and IPv6

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- IPAM providers should not be added to CAPI directly, but live as individual projects instead.
- IPAddress and IPAddressPool will only have limited validation (e.g. that the referenced Pool exists and that IP address strings are valid addresses). Advanced validation (whether an IP is actually part of the correct subnet for example) needs to be handled by IPAM providers.

## Proposal

The chosen approach was heavily inspired by metal3's ip-address-manager, which in turn seems to have been inspired by Kubernetes' PersistentVolumes. The proposal is twofold and consists of the API contract that should be added to CAPI and two examples to better illustrate how the contract is used by IPAM and infrastructure providers.

> ### IPAM API Contract

Author: I've restructured the proposal a lot. The Proposal section is now more high-level, and the details are in the implementation details section.

> The IPAM API contract provides a generic interface between CAPI infrastructure providers and to-be-developed IPAM providers. Any intersted infrastructure is supposed to be able to request IP Addresses from a defined pool of addresses. IPAM providers should then be able to find and fulfil such requests using any custom logic to do so.

Reviewer 6: typo: intersted

The contract consists of three resources:

> 

Reviewer: do we also need to elaborate the contractual conditions between the infraMachine CR and the IPAddressClaim?

Author: They are mentioned further down in the consumption section, but they should probably be explicitly listed in the contract.

- An IPAddressClaim, which is used to allocate addresses

> - An IPAddress that IPAM providers use to fulfil IPAddressClaims

Reviewer: what's the expectation if e.g an IPAddress CR is deleted out of band after it is assigned to an IPAddressClaim?

Author: Very good question. That's very provider specific if it's not specified, so it's probably a good idea to specify it :smile:

Author: I've now clarified this. Since IPAddress and IPAddressClaim are immutable, the IPAddress should not change as long as the IPAddressClaim exists. The provider can either re-create an identical IPAddress object, or block deletion of the IPAddress using a Finalizer.

> - IP Pools, which hold provider specific configuration on how addresses should be allocated, e.g. a specific subnet to use

Reviewer: IPPools?

Author: Wanted to differentiate between IPAddress/IPAddressClaims as concrete resources compared to IP Pools which is just a concept that's turned into concrete resources by the providers

Both **IPAddressClaims** and **IPAddresses** should be part of Cluster API, while **IPPools** are defined by the different IPAM providers.

An **IPAddressClaim** is used by infrastructure providers to request an IP Address. The claim contains a reference to an IP Pool. Because the pool is provider specific, the IPAM controllers can decide whether to handle a claim by inspecting the group and kind of the pool reference.

If a IPAM controller detects a Claim that references a Pool it controls, it allocates an IP address from that pool and creates an **IPAddress** to fulfil the claim. It also updates the status of the IPAddressClaim with a reference to the created Address.

```go
// IPAddressClaimSpec describes the desired state of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimSpec struct {

>    // Pool is a reference to the pool from which an IP address should be allocated.

Reviewer: Given an IP Pool is an arbitrary API of choice for the IPAM providers, wouldn't it be possible for multiple IPAM providers to coexist and have pools with the same name? i.e wouldn't this need to be a TypedLocalObjectReference?

Author: Good point, this is not really clear here: From the work on moving away from v1.ObjectReference I had some opinion on those reference types. This one would actually consist of Kind, Name and APIVersion. Not sure if that makes sense.

I planned to open a PR that adds those types to the current v1beta1 API to be able to be used for further additions to that version, as well as to hopefully migrate to them with v1beta2 (even though its arguably a breaking change). I think with the types already being there, and discussed already, it would be a lot easier to migrate, since the discussion doesn't have to be part of it anymore.

Author: I've changed it to Group, Kind and Name. Version is explicitly excluded as it actually does not make sense to have that. The client should decide on it's own which version it wants to consume.

   Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`
}

// IPAddressClaimStatus contains the status of an IPAddressClaim
type IPAddressClaimStatus struct {

>    // Address is a reference to the address that was allocated for this claim.

Reviewer: do we foresee the need conditions here to coordinate with the provider and signal the lifecycle of the claim

Reviewer 6: Good call, like IP exhaustion

Author: I like that idea. Ultimately the conditions could also be provider-specific.
It might make sense to have a `Summary` or `Phase` field that provides a set of values that is identical between all providers, and then have additional details in the conditions. E.g. `Pending`, `Bound`, `Error`.

   Address LocalObjectReference `json:"address,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddressClaim can be used to allocate IPAddresses from an IP Pool.
type IPAddressClaim struct {
   metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
   metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 
   Spec   IPAddressClaimSpec   `json:"spec,omitempty"`
   Status IPAddressClaimStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}
```

```go
// IPAddressSpec describes an IPAddress

> type IPAddressSpec struct {

Author: I think IPAddresses should be immutable. It's infrastructure provider specific whether it's possible to change the IP Address of a machine after it's been created, which could then make it hard/impossible to implement this contract. Since machines are treated as cattle, rolling the machine to get a new address should be sufficient imo.

I guess that depends on how providers implement the proposal on their side. The infra Machine won't contain a reference to the IPAddressClaim, as the Machine is created by CAPI which doesn't handle that. So the claim is created by the infra provider, and linked to the Machine using e.g. the name.
Most providers allow to specify IPs already, so I think that mechanism should just continue to exist so people can specify addresses manually as well.

> type IPAddressSpec struct {

Reviewer 8: Thanks for clarifying. I think it will be useful if some of this can be captured in the doc as a recommendation for the implementers, but I leave the final call on this to you

   // Claim is a reference to the claim this IPAddress was created for.
   Claim LocalObjectReference `json:"claim,omitempty"`
 
   // Pool is a reference to the pool that this IPAddress was created from.

>    Pool LocalObjectReference `json:"pool,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Same question https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/6000/files#r794443968

 
   // Address is the IP address.
   Address string `json:"address"`
 
   // Prefix is the prefix of the address.
   Prefix int `json:"prefix,omitempty"`
 
   // Gateway is the network gateway of network the address is from.
   Gateway string `json:"gateway,omitempty"`
}
 
// IPAddress is a representation of an IP Address that was allocated from an IP Pool.
type IPAddress struct {
   metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
   metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
 

>    Spec IPAddressSpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`

Reviewer: do we foresee the need for status here? e.g could an IP be release and reused by a different claim?

Author: I don't really see a need to reuse an IPAddress object. It's not like Volumes where there is persistent data associated with the object, which is lost when it's deleted and replaced with an spec-wise identical one. The IP address continues to exist, it's just not allocated anymore.
With the current scope of the proposal, which is about integration for machines, which are dynamically created and deleted, the only use case I can think of would be pre-allocating special addresses that can then be specifically selected, but that's something that's pretty provider specific and contradicts the "request -> fulfilment" approach. And it can also be implemented by providers using annotations.

Another use case might be fixed addresses for e.g. the api server. But those static addresses can also be set on cluster creation, and don't really require the dynamic allocation proposed here.

```yaml
apiVersion: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: InClusterIPPool
metadata:
  name: some-pool
spec:
  pools:
    - subnet: 10.10.10.0/24
      start: 10.10.10.100
      end: 10.10.10.200
```
A pool for an Infoblox Provider could look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: InfobloxIPPool
metadata:
  name: ib-pool
spec:
  networkView: "some-view"
  dnsZone: "test.example.com."
  network: 10.10.10.0/24
```

### Consumption

The consumers of this API contract are the infrastructure providers. As mentioned in the introduction, not all providers will require integration with IPAM systems. In addition, DHCP may be a viable or even better option in some environments. Integration with this API should therefore be implemented as an optional feature.

In order to consume IPAddresses, infrastructure providers need to create an IPAddressClaim for each address they require, and then have to wait until all claims are fulfilled. When creating those claims, a deterministic naming scheme should be used, so it's easy to identify which claims belong to which machine, e.g. `<infra machine name>-<interface name>`.

> Since IPAddressClaims have to reference a Pool, the infrastructure provider needs to allow specifying a Pool in its infrastructure templates, and the referenced Pool also has to be created (or exist already) when creating a cluster. The pool should be in the same namespace.

Reviewer: >The pool should be in the same namespace.

I think it must since we are relying on local refs. We should probably include some rbac guidance in the proposal for the new CRs.

Author: If it's supposed to be in the same namespace, that should be restricted by the type of reference used, which would then be one that simply doesn't allow to specify a namespace.

> Since IPAddressClaims have to reference a Pool, the infrastructure provider needs to allow specifying a Pool in its infrastructure templates, and the referenced Pool also has to be created (or exist already) when creating a cluster. The pool should be in the same namespace.

Reviewer 6: Needs to be clear about these resources should be namespace scoped. Especially IPPool, since it's implemented by third party

![relationships of ipam custom resources](images/ipam-integration/consumption.png)

> When creating an IPAddressClaim, the provider should set an owner reference to the infrastructure machine, so IPAM providers can fetch further information if necessary.

Reviewer 5: ref issues/PRs: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/5483, https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-vsphere/pull/1284

> When creating an IPAddressClaim, the provider should set an owner reference to the infrastructure machine, so IPAM providers can fetch further information if necessary.

Author: We can't really create it beforehand, can we? I guess you mean it should get created at the same time?

> When creating an IPAddressClaim, the provider should set an owner reference to the infrastructure machine, so IPAM providers can fetch further information if necessary.

Reviewer 8: Let's figure it out as an implementation detail. It was just a reminder about this case

Using CAPV as an example, a template *could* look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: VSphereMachineTemplate
metadata:
 name: example
 namespace: vsphere-site1
spec:
 template:
   spec:
     cloneMode: FullClone
     numCPUs: 8
     memoryMiB: 8192
     diskGiB: 45
     network:
       devices:
       - dhcp4: false
         fromPool: # reference to the pool
           group: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
           kind: IPPool

>            name: testpool

Reviewer 8: I know there was already some back and forth, but given the fact this is getting relevant from a growing number of providers, I'm wondering if we should move this to Machine level (we can also get there incrementally, but why not now?)
@vincepri @CecileRobertMichon @enxebre @sbueringer @yastij opinions?

Reviewer: Not opposed though based on the journey that took us from v1alpha1 to v1alpha2 where we figured the new abstractions as CRDs and the Refs and we are still evolving conditions, I think It'd be good to see some real usage to gain some knowledge, see a few ipam implementations and how's adoption from the providers before we figure the best way to plumb it into core API.

Author: That would certainly make this proposal easier. Claims could be created by CAPI. Providers would still be required to fetch IPAddresses though, if they are used.
The hard part probably is figuring out all available parameters that can be set on Machine level, and how to add additional parameters on provider side in a good way.

Reviewer 8: @vincepri @CecileRobertMichon @sbueringer @yastij opinions?

Reviewer 5: This would be definitely save the providers from doing one-off code changes for creating the Claim objects. I will group this as an enhancement in the similar bucket as failure domains. Specifying the IPPool will follow the Ref conventions seen all through CAPI objects.
Plus it makes more sense for Machine objects to create the `IPClaim`s as the proposal intends to introduce these API types as part of the CAPI codebase.

Reviewer 3: Hm given that we need the CRDs and at least a webhook in core CAPI already I lean towards making it a part of core CAPI so we can kind of make sure that everything works as intended (more or less like we already handle other contracts like the InfrastructureMachine where we have a machine controller which coordinates)

```

A Machine generated from that template could then look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: VSphereMachine
metadata:
name: example-1
namespace: vsphere-site1
spec:
 cloneMode: FullClone
 numCPUs: 8
 memoryMiB: 8192
 diskGiB: 45
 network:
   devices:
   - dhcp4: false
     fromPool: # reference to the pool
       group: ipam.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
       kind: IPPool
       name: testpool
status:
 network:
   devices:
     - claim:
         name: example-1-1
```

### User Stories

> - Detail the things that people will be able to do if this proposal is implemented.

Reviewer: remove template?

- Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of the system.
- The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting bogged down.

#### Story 1

> As a CAPI user I want to use static IP addresses with my Machines to avoid problems with DHCP lease duration during rolling cluster upgrades.

Reviewer: can we be specific about which persona is the CAPI user here and the other stories? e.g cluster operator

Some authors may wish to use requirements in addition to user stories.
Technical requirements should derived from user stories, and provide a trace from
use case to design, implementation and test case. Requirements can be prioritised
using the MoSCoW (MUST, SHOULD, COULD, WON'T) criteria.

The FR and NFR notation is intended to be used as cross-references across a CAEP.

The difference between goals and requirements is that between an executive summary
and the body of a document. Each requirement should be in support of a goal,
but narrowly scoped in a way that is verifiable or ideally - testable.

#### Functional Requirements

Functional requirements are the properties that this design should include.

##### FR1

##### FR2

#### Non-Functional Requirements

Non-functional requirements are user expectations of the solution. Include
considerations for performance, reliability and security.

##### NFR1

##### NFR2
-->

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

<!--
- What are some important details that didn't come across above.
- What are the caveats to the implementation?
- Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
- Talk about core concepts and how they releate.
-->

> - Only the custom resource definitions for IPAddress and IPAddressClaim, and relevant webhooks should become part of the main cluster-api project

Author: It was suggested to start with an exp api in some office hours meeting, so that's what I'm going for with the implementation. Eventually it should end up as part of the main CAPI api though.

> - Only the custom resource definitions for IPAddress and IPAddressClaim, and relevant webhooks should become part of the main cluster-api project

Reviewer 8: Let's clarify this in the doc

- An example provider that provides in-cluster IP Address management (also useful for testing, or when no other IPAM solution is available) should be implemented as a separate project in a separate repository.

> - A shared library for providers and consumers should be implemented as part of that extra project.

Author: I will once I figure that out exactly :smile: I'm working on a reference in-cluster implementation, which might help with that. Not sure if it's necessary/helpful to try to design this beforehand, or if it's easier to build it when creating the first few implementations.

> - A shared library for providers and consumers should be implemented as part of that extra project.

Reviewer 8: Makes sense; If possible we should document high level the capabilities we expect this library should offer, otherwise let's just add a note that details will be added in a follow up iteration
